README.md, before:

Cryptoclock ESP8266
===================

![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/cryptoclock/firmware-esp8266.svg)
![GitHub prerelease](https://img.shields.io/github/tag-pre/cryptoclock/firmware-esp8266.svg)
![Travis](https://img.shields.io/travis/com/cryptoclock/firmware-esp8266.svg)

Cryptoclock is a device based on ESP8266 chip, designed for displaying prices, messages, tickers, or any other arbitrary data on a compact display.

Hardware:
----------
In it's basic form it consists of stock ESP8266 development board (NodeMCU, WeMOS, SparkFun, etc.) connected
to a compatible display without any additional electronic components.
By default, 32x8 LED matrix with MAX7219 driver chips is used, along with optional gyroscope module (for automatic display orientation).

Currently supported displays:
-----------------------------
* Any graphical display configuration supported by U8g2 library (see https://github.com/olikraus/u8g2/wiki/u8g2setupcpp for details)
* TM1637 7-segment driver
* Lixie
* Neopixel (Work in Progress)

Peripherials
-------------
* MPU6050 gyroscope/accelerometer module via I2C interface
  * SDA - D2(GPIO4)
  * SCL - D1(GPIO5)
* Piezoelectric buzzer
  * D8(GPIO15)
* MAX7219 chainable led matrix
  * DATA - D5(GPIO14)
  * CS - D6(GPIO12)
  * CLK - D7(GPIO13))

Mode of Operation
------------------
On startup, the firmware connectes to configured WiFi. (If no WiFI is available, or not yet configured, it switches the device into AP mode.)
When WiFi is successfully connected, it connects to a set websocket server, and starts continuously reading and displaying any numbers
that are sent by the server. The server can be a www.cryptoclock.net server, or any custom websocket server, using the same protocol.
(See protocol section for details).

Pressing the menu button (by default mapped to boot/flash on dev boards) brings out menu which can be navigated using
short and long presses of the button.
Holding the menu button down for more than 1 sec switches the device into AP mode.
Holding the menu button down for more than 10 secs will erase all the stored device settings, bringing it back to factory defaults.

AP mode
--------
In AP mode, the device acts as a WiFi Access Point (SSID shown on display) with captive portal.
You can use e.g. smartphone/notebook to connect to it and using your device browser to configure both WiFi credentials and device settings.
If not automatically redirected, you can point your browser to http://192.168.4.1 to access the configuration page.

Menu
-----
Use short button presses to switch between items, and long press to select/confirm.

* OTP - sends OTP request to server (see section OTP for details)
* Info - displays info about current firmware
* Clock - sets if clock should be periodically displayed in place of data (Cl On/Cl off), or if clock is the only thing displayed (Cl only)
* ERASE - erase all the stored device settings, bringing it back to factory defaults

OTP
----
One-Time Password function is used to register(pair) a device with a server account. (As by default, server connections are anonymous).
Activating the OTP on the device will send an OTP request to a server. Server responds with numeric password which is then shown on display.
You can then enter the displayed number into server's web interface to pair the device with your account.

Note that each device is identified to the server using an unique number (UUID), which is randomly generated after device ERASE,
 requiring you to re-add the device if you choose so.

Protocol
---------
The protocol is implemented using JSON messages over standard websocket messages (ws:// or wss://).
See file _protocol.md_ for details.

For compatiblity with older protocol, any non-JSON numeric text received is treated like a tick value update.

Firmware update
----------------
Upon startup (or when triggered by a server command), the device will check the specified update server for a firmware update.
When update is found, it will start downloading and verifying the new firmware, during which the device may become unresponsive for few minutes.
It is recommended to not disconnect or power-off the device during update, however it should be safe to do so.
Upon sucessfull update, the device is restarted.

The official firmware server is available at http://update.cryptoclock.net.

Providing custom firmware update server:
-----------------------------------------
Make standard http server that will respond to url _/esp/update_.
(Update over https is not available due to ESP8266 RAM limitations.)

The device will connect to the url provided with parameters 'md5' and 'model' specifying current firmware checksum and model number,
e.g. 'http://someserver.org/esp/update?md5=e4d909c290d0fb1ca068ffaddf22cbd0&model=3DA0100'.
The server should respond with http code either '304' if no update is required, or '200' followed by firmware image as http data.

Setup and Building
-------------------
The firmware is using Arduino framework and libraries.
The build system is preconfigured for Platformio, which exists as a plugin into VScode and Atom editors.

1. Install VScode or Atom editor
2. Install Platformio extension into the editor
3. Point the editor to this folder
4. Customize configuration (see below)
5. Start Platformio build command
6. Start Platformio upload command to upload the firmware over USB into the device
7. Start Platfomio monitor command to see debug output from the connected device

Configuration
--------------
First, check file _platformio.ini_ for any configuration related to the device (COM port speed etc.),
build flags etc. You may enable additional debugging output from various arduino library systems using
the provided -DDEBUG_* build flags, however note that this may cause the device to run out of available RAM
and restart.

Depending on the display attached, pins used and other hardware configuration, when building, set the environment variable _X\_MODEL\_NUMBER_ to
one of the models listed in src/config_model.hpp, or create or customize your own.

The default model when not specified is _3DA0100_, consisting of 32x8 LED matrix with MAX7219 driver, connected to pins D5-D7, and optional
gyroscope module MPU6050 connected via I2C on pins D1/D2.

Extending the firmware
-----------------------
Adding new display driver library to the firmware can be done by making class inheriting from class Display::DisplayT,
overloading the defined virtual methods with custom ones, and adding initialization code into setupDisplay() function in main.cpp.
Check all setup*() functions in main.cpp for customizing the default values, menu items and all other aspects of the firmware.

Used Libraries from repository
-------------------------------
* [WebSockets](https://travis-ci.org/Links2004/arduinoWebSockets)
* [NtpClientLib](https://github.com/gmag11/NtpClient)
* [ESP8266TrueRandom](https://github.com/marvinroger/ESP8266TrueRandom) - UUID generation
* [I2Cdevlib-MPU6050](https://github.com/jrowberg/i2cdevlib.git) - i2c library for controlling MPU6050 gyroscope/accelerometer
* [TM1637](https://github.com/avishorp/TM1637) - driver for TM1637 7-segment LED displays (numeric)
* [Time](http://playground.arduino.cc/code/time) - dependency of NtpClientLib
* [FastLED](http://fastled.io) - dependency of Lixie-Arduino
* [ArduinoJson](https://arduinojson.org) - JSON (de)serialization library
* [DigitLedDisplay](https://github.com/ozhantr/DigitLedDisplay) - driver for MAX7219/7221 7-segment LED displays (numeric)

Modified Libraries used
------------------------
* [U8g2](https://github.com/olikraus/u8g2) - driver library for multiple displays
    changes: support for 6-panel max7219 display configuration, waiting for upstream addition

* [WiFiManager](https://github.com/tzapu/WiFiManager) - AP captive portal to configure device over WiFi
    changes: customized html and css for captive portal, fixes to storing and deleting AP credentials

Licence
--------
Licensed under GNU GPL (version 2 or any later version) license (see file LICENSE for details)

Copyright (C) 2018 www.cryptoclock.net <info@cryptoclock.net>

Commit message:

Add support for reversed 32x8 MAX7219 displays via configuration flag "-DU8G2_MAX7219_INVERTED_MODULES"

README.md, after:

Cryptoclock ESP8266
===================

![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/cryptoclock/firmware-esp8266.svg)
![GitHub prerelease](https://img.shields.io/github/tag-pre/cryptoclock/firmware-esp8266.svg)
![Travis](https://img.shields.io/travis/com/cryptoclock/firmware-esp8266.svg)

Cryptoclock is a device based on ESP8266 chip, designed for displaying prices, messages, tickers, or any other arbitrary data on a compact display.

Hardware:
----------
In it's basic form it consists of stock ESP8266 development board (NodeMCU, WeMOS, SparkFun, etc.) connected
to a compatible display without any additional electronic components.
By default, 32x8 LED matrix with MAX7219 driver chips is used, along with optional gyroscope module (for automatic display orientation).

Currently supported displays:
-----------------------------
* Any graphical display configuration supported by U8g2 library (see https://github.com/olikraus/u8g2/wiki/u8g2setupcpp for details)
* TM1637 7-segment driver
* Lixie
* Neopixel (Work in Progress)

Peripherials
-------------
* MPU6050 gyroscope/accelerometer module via I2C interface
  * SDA - D2(GPIO4)
  * SCL - D1(GPIO5)
* Piezoelectric buzzer
  * D8(GPIO15)
* MAX7219 chainable led matrix
  * DATA - D5(GPIO14)
  * CS - D6(GPIO12)
  * CLK - D7(GPIO13))

Mode of Operation
------------------
On startup, the firmware connectes to configured WiFi. (If no WiFI is available, or not yet configured, it switches the device into AP mode.)
When WiFi is successfully connected, it connects to a set websocket server, and starts continuously reading and displaying any numbers
that are sent by the server. The server can be a www.cryptoclock.net server, or any custom websocket server, using the same protocol.
(See protocol section for details).

Pressing the menu button (by default mapped to boot/flash on dev boards) brings out menu which can be navigated using
short and long presses of the button.
Holding the menu button down for more than 1 sec switches the device into AP mode.
Holding the menu button down for more than 10 secs will erase all the stored device settings, bringing it back to factory defaults.

AP mode
--------
In AP mode, the device acts as a WiFi Access Point (SSID shown on display) with captive portal.
You can use e.g. smartphone/notebook to connect to it and using your device browser to configure both WiFi credentials and device settings.
If not automatically redirected, you can point your browser to http://192.168.4.1 to access the configuration page.

Menu
-----
Use short button presses to switch between items, and long press to select/confirm.

* OTP - sends OTP request to server (see section OTP for details)
* Info - displays info about current firmware
* Clock - sets if clock should be periodically displayed in place of data (Cl On/Cl off), or if clock is the only thing displayed (Cl only)
* ERASE - erase all the stored device settings, bringing it back to factory defaults

OTP
----
One-Time Password function is used to register(pair) a device with a server account. (As by default, server connections are anonymous).
Activating the OTP on the device will send an OTP request to a server. Server responds with numeric password which is then shown on display.
You can then enter the displayed number into server's web interface to pair the device with your account.

Note that each device is identified to the server using an unique number (UUID), which is randomly generated after device ERASE,
 requiring you to re-add the device if you choose so.

Protocol
---------
The protocol is implemented using JSON messages over standard websocket messages (ws:// or wss://).
See file _protocol.md_ for details.

For compatiblity with older protocol, any non-JSON numeric text received is treated like a tick value update.

Firmware update
----------------
Upon startup (or when triggered by a server command), the device will check the specified update server for a firmware update.
When update is found, it will start downloading and verifying the new firmware, during which the device may become unresponsive for few minutes.
It is recommended to not disconnect or power-off the device during update, however it should be safe to do so.
Upon sucessfull update, the device is restarted.

The official firmware server is available at http://update.cryptoclock.net.

Providing custom firmware update server:
-----------------------------------------
Make standard http server that will respond to url _/esp/update_.
(Update over https is not available due to ESP8266 RAM limitations.)

The device will connect to the url provided with parameters 'md5' and 'model' specifying current firmware checksum and model number,
e.g. 'http://someserver.org/esp/update?md5=e4d909c290d0fb1ca068ffaddf22cbd0&model=3DA0100'.
The server should respond with http code either '304' if no update is required, or '200' followed by firmware image as http data.

Setup and Building
-------------------
The firmware is using Arduino framework and libraries.
The build system is preconfigured for Platformio, which exists as a plugin into VScode and Atom editors.

1. Install VScode or Atom editor
2. Install Platformio extension into the editor
3. Point the editor to this folder
4. Customize configuration (see below)
5. Start Platformio build command
6. Start Platformio upload command to upload the firmware over USB into the device
7. Start Platfomio monitor command to see debug output from the connected device

Configuration
--------------
First, check file _platformio.ini_ for any configuration related to the device (COM port speed etc.),
build flags etc. You may enable additional debugging output from various arduino library systems using
the provided -DDEBUG_* build flags, however note that this may cause the device to run out of available RAM
and restart.

Depending on the display attached, pins used and other hardware configuration, when building, set the environment variable _X\_MODEL\_NUMBER_ to
one of the models listed in src/config_model.hpp, or create or customize your own.

The default model when not specified is _3DA0100_, consisting of 32x8 LED matrix with MAX7219 driver, connected to pins D5-D7, and optional
gyroscope module MPU6050 connected via I2C on pins D1/D2. Note that some 32x8 matrices with MAX7219 may have the individual modules in different orientation or order; if the individual blocks appear reversed, add -DU8G2_MAX7219_INVERTED_MODULES to build_flags in _platformio.ini_.


Extending the firmware
-----------------------
Adding new display driver library to the firmware can be done by making class inheriting from class Display::DisplayT,
overloading the defined virtual methods with custom ones, and adding initialization code into setupDisplay() function in main.cpp.
Check all setup*() functions in main.cpp for customizing the default values, menu items and all other aspects of the firmware.

Used Libraries from repository
-------------------------------
* [WebSockets](https://travis-ci.org/Links2004/arduinoWebSockets)
* [NtpClientLib](https://github.com/gmag11/NtpClient)
* [ESP8266TrueRandom](https://github.com/marvinroger/ESP8266TrueRandom) - UUID generation
* [I2Cdevlib-MPU6050](https://github.com/jrowberg/i2cdevlib.git) - i2c library for controlling MPU6050 gyroscope/accelerometer
* [TM1637](https://github.com/avishorp/TM1637) - driver for TM1637 7-segment LED displays (numeric)
* [Time](http://playground.arduino.cc/code/time) - dependency of NtpClientLib
* [FastLED](http://fastled.io) - dependency of Lixie-Arduino
* [ArduinoJson](https://arduinojson.org) - JSON (de)serialization library
* [DigitLedDisplay](https://github.com/ozhantr/DigitLedDisplay) - driver for MAX7219/7221 7-segment LED displays (numeric)

Modified Libraries used
------------------------
* [U8g2](https://github.com/olikraus/u8g2) - driver library for multiple displays
    changes: support for 6-panel max7219 display configuration, waiting for upstream addition

* [WiFiManager](https://github.com/tzapu/WiFiManager) - AP captive portal to configure device over WiFi
    changes: customized html and css for captive portal, fixes to storing and deleting AP credentials

Licence
--------
Licensed under GNU GPL (version 2 or any later version) license (see file LICENSE for details)

Copyright (C) 2018 www.cryptoclock.net <info@cryptoclock.net>
